‘I phoned the president of Ghana onstage in a pub’: how we made The Mark Thomas Comedy Product
Mark Thomas, comedian
I remember the producer Geoff Anderson and I having a conversation about making a radical version of That’s Life! But instead of bringing dodgy double-glazing salesmen to book, we’d bring down international capitalism. We failed. But we had a really good go.
We piloted Comedy Product in 1995. I was 32 and had done a bit of telly stuff – The Mary Whitehouse Experience, and I’d hosted Loose Talk on Radio 1. But what most obsessed me was The Cutting Edge, a topical weekly comedy show that I’d been part of founding at the Comedy Store. The immediacy coinciding with the strength of the writing would often reflect or refine the audiences’ feeling about a story. Looking back, that was where I began to grind out the daily practice of political comedy.
Channel 4 approached us about making the show but the commissioning process took so long. The commissioning editor at the time, Seamus Cassidy, was a great bloke – he was responsible for Father Ted and some other brilliant shows. Trouble was, he took ages to make up his mind. We did a pilot but it was another year before we were up and running.
No one had tried to make this kind of show before. We were constantly asking each other, “Can we do this?” In the pilot, we were chasing Lord Bethell in his open-top election battlebus, heckling him with a megaphone, worried that we were going to get arrested. The final thing we did was catch a Finnish arms dealer moving guns around the world illegally. Our exposé led to Finland tightening up their legislation. It was a steep learning curve, from shouting abuse at a Tory MEP to chasing international arms dealers.
The standup bits were filmed on a Sunday night before an audience in a south London pub called The Bedford, which used to be on the edge of Balham’s red-light district. Hard to imagine now, with the gentrification that’s happened there. We’d write the script on Friday afternoons. I’d do a couple of warmup gigs on Friday and Saturday night, with the researchers sorting out any problems as we went along. Then, on Sunday, we’d record the show.
We made 45 episodes, and Channel 4 gave us a chance to learn on the job. Their lawyers tried to make things work and, on the few occasions they knocked us back, it was executives higher up the food chain on issues of taste and decency. We always shot two shows of the standup with different audiences. In between, we’d get the lawyers’ notes. It gave us space to have fun with it: there was a playful version and the legally required one. Sometimes, I was with the lawyers right up until I stepped back on stage.
We had tenacity, an ability to improvise, and sometimes we got lucky. We got Peter Brabeck-Letmathe, CEO of Nestlé, on camera at a time when they were mislabelling their baby milk products in Africa, after a tip-off that he was giving a talk at Oxford University. The college had these great big gates, and a student just let us in. Within two days, he was faxing us new designs for their products with the change of wording.
We had scientists, activists and whistleblowers helping us. Someone told us about the radioactive bird shit at Sellafield and we thought: “That can’t be true, can it?” Someone passed us the phone number of Jerry Rawlings, the president of Ghana, and there I was, phoning him on stage from a Balham pub! Some MPs were very open. One just called, I went round to their office and they handed over a load of information about how Britain was refurbishing guns for Morocco in the occupied area of Western Sahara.